Welcome to Regression Trees.
After watching this video, you will be able to describe a regression tree and recognize
how it is different from classification.
You will also be able to explain how to create a regression tree.
A regression tree is analogous to a decision tree that predicts continuous values rather
than discrete classes.
The distinguishing feature between classification and regression is the characteristic of the
target or labeled data.
In classification, the target variable is categorical, such as true or false.
In regression, the target is a continuous value, such as temperature or salary.
When a decision tree is adapted to solve regression problems, it is called a regression tree.
Let's compare classification trees with regression trees to understand how they're
different.
The target of a classification tree is to classify data into discrete sets, whereas
a regression tree aims at predicting continuous target variables.
Hence, the target variable for a classification tree is categorical but floating for a regression
tree.
The prediction at leaf nodes for a classification tree is a class-labeled majority vote, whereas
for a regression tree, it is the average value of target values.
Some used cases of classification trees are spam detection, image classification, medical
diagnosis.
Regression trees are used for predicting revenue, temperatures, and wildfire risk.
Regression trees are created by recursively splitting the dataset into subsets to maximize
information gained from data splitting.
This process generates a tree-like structure and minimizes the randomness of the classes
assigned to the split nodes.
Let's consider this example.
Given a continuous feature from a dataset and a trial threshold value, alpha, the data
in a node is split into two subsets according to whether the data is greater than or less
than alpha, and the corresponding points are assigned to the left and right nodes.
If the feature is binary, consisting of two classes, then the split is according to the
two classes.
You make a prediction at each node based either on a class voting scheme as with decision
trees or by using the average of the target values in the node.
The predicted value, y-hat, for a given node is defined as the average of the actual target
values, y, i of the data points in the node.
You could use other statistics, like the median value, to assign the prediction.
This would be preferable when your data is skewed.
For normally distributed data, the median is comparable to the mean, but the median
is more expensive to compute.
Instead of using the entropy or information gained criteria to measure the quality of
a split, as for decision trees, regression trees select features that minimize the error
between the actual values, y, i in the resulting nodes, and the predicted value, y-hat.
A natural criterion for measuring the split quality of a given feature uses the mean-squared
error, or MSE.
Notice that this amounts to measuring the variance of the target values within each
node, which gauges how spread out the values are.
The smaller the variance is, the more closely the values agree.
To measure the quality of a split, the weighted average of the MSEs of each split node can
be used.
The weighted average is calculated as average MSE equals one over the number of observations
in the two split nodes, times the sum of the number of observations in the left split times
the MSE of the left split, and the number of observations in the right split times the
MSE of the right split.
The lower this value, the lower the variance, and thus, the higher the quality of the split.
During training, the tree finds the feature and threshold that best splits each node.
For each potential split of a feature, the tree calculates the MSE for the left and right
subsets.
The MSE of the split is a weighted average of the MSEs of the subsets.
The split with the lowest-weighted MSE is chosen.
This process minimizes the variance in the predicted values and improves the accuracy
of the regression tree.
For a binary feature, instead of using thresholds, the data is simply separated into its two
classes, and the split quality is just the weighted average of the class MSEs.
The weighted MSE has only one possible result, so it is already optimized.
For a multi-class feature, you can use a strategy like one-versus-one or one-versus-all to generate
a set of possible binary splits.
Then, for each binary split, calculate the weighted average of the MSEs.
Select the split that minimizes the weighted MSE, and thus, the lowest prediction variance.
How can you choose a set of trial thresholds to split a continuous feature on?
There are many ways.
Here's one strategy.
Start by sorting the feature's values so that Xi is less than or equal to Xj, for all
indexes i less than j.
Drop any duplicated values so that Xi is strictly less than Xj, for all i less than j.
Define your candidate thresholds, αi as the midpoints between each pair of consecutive
values, αi is half of Xi, plus Xi plus 1.
Choose the threshold that minimizes the weighted MSE for its data split.
This is an exhaustive search method that doesn't scale well to big data.
For very large datasets, selecting a sparse subset of these thresholds can improve efficiency
at the cost of accuracy.
The method also assumes the target values, X, are uniformly distributed.
For efficiency, you should consider the distribution when sampling the thresholds.
In this video, you learned that a regression tree is analogous to a decision tree that
predicts continuous values.
In classification, the target variable is categorical, and in regression, the target
is a continuous value.
Regression trees are created by recursively splitting the dataset into subsets to maximize
information gained from data splitting.
MSE is a natural criterion for measuring the split quality of a given feature.
The regression tree finds the feature and threshold that best splits each node during
training.
The feature can be binary or multi-class.
Finally, you learned that you can choose continuous feature trial thresholds in multiple ways
depending on data size.